Why Biology Became a Data Science Field
Explain how Python, statistics, and machine learning are transforming the life sciences.

The fundamental nature of life science has changed. The availability of advanced technologies has brought an increase in the amount of experimental data that can be generated. The advances in gene sequencing have led to databases of individuals’ genetic codes and their links to various health-related outcomes such as diabetes, cancer, and genetic diseases. By using computational approaches, scientists understand the causes of these diseases and use this understanding to develop new treatments [1]. The term "machine learning" refers to a set of topics dealing with the creation and evaluation of algorithms that facilitate pattern recognition, classification, and prediction based on models derived from existing data. Machine learning methods had improved the efficiency of discovery and understanding in the mounting volume and complexity of biological data. For instance, one earlier machine learning technique called the perceptron constituted an attempt to model actual behavior, and the field of neural network design emerged from this attempt. Furthermore, the output of machine learning is used to identify and classify cancerous tumors and to evaluate the effects of potential disease treatments. [2] Using machine learning algorithms, researchers are able to integrate large-scale heterogeneous data, such as clinical, imaging, and genomic data, to better understand the genetic basis of diseases and identify the optimal therapeutic approach. As ML does not depend on the rules defined by human experts but instead processes data in a raw form and is programmed to learn to perform the task of identifying the rules, the computational methods adjust its parameters to provide the approximations of the relationship implicit in the input and output examples. That approach has been successfully applied to the solving of important clinical challenges, such as the detection of retinopathy, melanoma, and Parkinson's disease. [3] Furthermore, computational methods have been useful in drug design, discovery, and repurposing. De novo drug design is the process of making new drugs in which the process of signalling new drugs starts by studying the disease's targets, such as receptor proteins. The development of de novo drug discovery faces many challenges, which include long research and development cycles, high cost, and limited access to experimental success rates. The employment of machine learning in drug discovery hastens the characterization of drug compounds, which can be represented by the molecular fingerprints of compounds. For instance, duvenaud et al. trained molecular structure into molecular fingerprints via graph convolution network. Drug repurposing, which is the consideration of a drug in which its mechanism of action and pharmacokinetics can be considered as prior knowledge of a specific domain, has been getting attention from pharmaceutical companies. Computational methods help in drug repurposing by detecting relationships among various types of biological entities such as genes, proteins, diseases, and drugs. [4]





References
Ramsundar, Bharath, et al. Deep learning for the life sciences: applying deep learning to genomics, microscopy, drug discovery, and more. O'Reilly Media, 2019.
Tarca AL, Carey VJ, Chen X-w, Romero R, Drăghici S (2007) Machine Learning and Its Applications to Biology. PLoS Comput Biol 3(6): e116. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.0030116
3. Noorbakhsh, Javad, et al. "Machine learning in biology and medicine." Advances in Molecular Pathology 2.1 (2019): 143-152.
Yang, Fan, et al. "Machine learning applications in drug repurposing." Interdisciplinary Sciences: Computational Life Sciences 14.1 (2022): 15-21.